News - Date: 06 March 2021 Written by: Tshifhiwa Mukwevho / Viewed: 216 Unarine Mulaudzi from Makwarela in the Thulamela area believes that knowing one’s roots is the key to success. This 19-year-old BCom student at the University of the Free State is also the winner of the Indoni Miss Venda and Indoni Miss Ubuntu cultural pageants. She is passionate about making a difference in the lives of her fellow human beings, and heartily involves herself in community-building projects. “I am passionate about bringing change and giving to those who are less fortunate. This passion has led me to initiate a programme in which I put together school uniforms and then distribute them to pupils at schools,” she said. “The idea came to light after I saw children go to school wearing casual shoes. When I asked them why they were not wearing school shoes, they said that they had none, and that broke my heart.” That was when the Excel School Shoes Campaign was initiated. Unarine visited Mbaleni Primary School and Mmbara Primary School on the first day that schools re-opened to assess the learners’ needs. “I could not believe my eyes. Some children were walking around the schoolyard barefoot, while others were wearing tekkies,” she said. “That sight broke my heart, and tears stung my eyes. I just asked myself how they must be feeling, what it did to their self-esteem, or if they had merely accepted the situation.” Unarine requested the names and shoe sizes of pupils whom she saw needed a new pair of shoes. “What happened next was that we were able to amass 26 pairs of school shoes, but the exact number of learners who needed shoes was 37. So, unfortunately, we were unable to provide shoes for all of them.” Unarine, who is also the founder of the Miss Makwarela Exclusive pageant, is calling on people who are willing to contribute towards the welfare of needy pupils to communicate with her directly. “No one gets to choose which family they are born into. It is not their fault that they cannot afford a full school uniform,” she said. “Our communities require young people to take action in their lives, but we are unfortunately living in a generation where getting drunk is considered to be an achievement that brings self-satisfaction and happiness. I took a decision to find my happiness in helping those in need. So, let's keep a smile on a child’s face.” People who might be interested in the activities of the Excel School Shoes Campaign, or who want to contribute to it, can contact Unarine on Tel 068 030 3454 or WhatsApp her on 081 449 0471.  Unarine Mulaudzi is determined to add value to the lives of pupils. Picture supplied.  Tshifhiwa Given Mukwevho was born in 1984 in Madombidzha village, not far from Louis Trichardt in the Limpopo Province. After submitting articles for roughly a year for Limpopo Mirror's youth supplement, Makoya, he started writing for the main newspaper. He is a prolific writer who published his first book, titled A Traumatic Revenge in 2011. It focusses on life on the street and how to survive amidst poverty. His second book titled The Violent Gestures of Life was published in 2014.  Email: givenmukwevho@yahoo.com