News - Date: 14 March 2021 Written by: Andries van Zyl / Viewed: 312 The wheels have been set in motion for “Skuldbult” residents in Louis Trichardt to have their residential area fenced off from the rest of the town. Almost exactly a year ago, the Schimper Heights Homeowners Association sent letters to the residents in the area in which details of the proposed project were made available. “Due to the worsening safety and security situation in Makhado, a number of residents resolved to apply to the Makhado Local Municipality for permission to establish access control (security control) measures at the entrances to parts of Louis Trichardt Ext 1 & Ext 7,” the letter read. The decision to push forward with the project was taken on the basis of a majority vote after a process of consultation. The area consists of 81 private properties. More than two thirds of the residents supported the proposed initiative in writing (a total of 58 landowners gave their consent for the initiative). As part of the consultation process, nominations were also received for members to serve on Schimper Heights Security Village committee (the proposed homeowners’ association) and the two persons who received the most nominations were Mr Christian Mocke and Mr André Prinsloo. Prinsloo originally initiated the project. Last week, town planner Mr Theo Kotze of Polokwane advertised his intention to apply to the Makhado Municipality (on behalf of the Schimper Heights Homeowners Association) for the approval of the proposed access-control facilities along certain streets in the said extension. In terms of the application, the proposal is that access facilities be established in Piet Retief Street. This will include a boom gate and guard house manned by security guards. Furthermore, the application also asks for the closing off of several streets in the two extensions, namely Hertzog Street, Van Warmelo Street, Bergh Street and Barnard Street. These streets will be closed off with a palisade fence and gate. The gate is for cases of emergencies to gain quicker access. Kotze brough the application in terms of Section 54(2)(g) of the Makhado Municipality Spatial Planning, Land Development and Land Use Management by-law of 2016 for the approval of the proposed access control facilities. Particulars of the application submitted by Kotze will lie for inspection during normal office hours at the Director Development Planning office, C001, on the first floor at the Makhado Civic Centre for 30 days after 5 March (5 April). Objections to or representations in respect of the application must be lodged with or made in writing and hand delivered to the above-mentioned office or posted to the Municipal Manager, Makhado Municipality, Private Bag X2596, Louis Trichardt, 0920. If approved, the fencing off of an existing residential area (excluding security complexes) for security purposes with a single access control will be a first for Louis Trichardt. According to Mocke, they are optimistic that the proposed project will add value to properties in the area. “But it is now in the hands of the municipality to decide,” said Mocke. He further stated that the residents in the area to be fenced off would bear the costs of the fence and security facilities. In the meantime, Mocke said that residents still experienced problems with crime emanating from the bushy areas adjacent to the residential area.  A map of the streets to be closed off with a single entry point through Piet Retief Street. Image supplied.  Andries joined the Zoutpansberger and Limpopo Mirror in April 1993 as a darkroom assistant. Within a couple of months he moved over to the production side of the newspaper and eventually doubled as a reporter. In 1995 he left the newspaper group and travelled overseas for a couple of months. In 1996, Andries rejoined the Zoutpansberger as a reporter. In August 2002, he was appointed as News Editor of the Zoutpansberger, a position he holds until today.  Email: andries@zoutnet.co.za