News - Date: 13 March 2021 Written by: Tshifhiwa Mukwevho / Viewed: 140 Multi-prize-winning Special Olympian Rofhiwa Manwadu, who is also an ambassador for the Special Olympics in Vhembe, is calling on the people of Vhembe District to remain positive and optimistic about life in the face of the painful circumstances brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic. He was speaking to Limpopo Mirror from his office in the Thulamela Municipality’s building on Tuesday, 2 March, and said that he understood very well that the pandemic had brought about changes that had altered many people’s lives and way of living. “I know, and I continue to witness, that we have lost loved ones to Covid-19. Some people are left without jobs, as many companies did retrenchments when they realised that they could not afford to pay them any longer,” he said. “Yes, times are hard. We are going through tough times, but we need to apply a positive attitude towards life, or else we will end up suffering from a variety of other stress-related illnesses.” Manwadu, who resides at Thohoyandou Block G, was born with cerebral palsy, a condition that affects his speech and ability to walk properly. This does not stop him from setting goals for himself, though. He is a workaholic and an indispensable stalwart in the sporting field in Vhembe. “Due to Covid-19, I was unable to host the annual Special Olympics tournament, but I really can’t complain that much, because I know that if we continue to pray to God, He will heal our land, and then everything will get back to normal,” he said. Manwadu has shown that people with disabilities are also capable of setting dreams and realising them; they are individuals with capabilities and abilities just like any other person. “I was a slow learner because of my condition, and as such I couldn’t attend a normal school,” he said. “I attended Fulufhelo Special School, where I studied arts. My interest in sporting activities grew, especially in athletics.” He had caretakers and educators who motivated him. At the age of 17, he had qualified to participate in the Special Olympic Games, and he has never looked back. He has visited, among other countries, Namibia, Germany, the United State of America, China, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sweden, Greece, Zimbabwe, Italy, and Thailand to represent South Africa. “To date, I have won 60 medals (silver and gold) and many trophies, and I am not planning to retire soon,” he said with a smile. “I want to tell those who still look down on people with disabilities to have a positive outlook towards life and to never underestimate us. We are the pillars of this society,” he said.  Rofhiwa Manwadu sprints with joy. Picture: Tshifhiwa Mukwevho  Tshifhiwa Given Mukwevho was born in 1984 in Madombidzha village, not far from Louis Trichardt in the Limpopo Province. After submitting articles for roughly a year for Limpopo Mirror's youth supplement, Makoya, he started writing for the main newspaper. He is a prolific writer who published his first book, titled A Traumatic Revenge in 2011. It focusses on life on the street and how to survive amidst poverty. His second book titled The Violent Gestures of Life was published in 2014.  Email: givenmukwevho@yahoo.com