News - Date: 28 January 2021 Written by: Bernard Chiguvare / Viewed: 398 An estimated 78 families from the Vhembe region were badly affected by the recent heavy rains brought on by tropical storm Eloise. “The majority of these people have started receiving food parcels, dignitary packs, blankets and other basic amenities,” said the Limpopo Department of Social Development in a media statement on Monday, 25 January. This follows the heavy rains that wreaked havoc in some parts of Limpopo the past weekend. According to the Department of Social Development, most of the affected families are in the Vhembe District. Limpopo Mirror spoke to some of these families. Around midnight on Saturday, 23 January, heavy rain poured over Vuvha Seville village in the Makhado area and damaged two houses belonging to Portia Ranenyi. She lives with her husband and three children. “We really could not do much. We managed to remove a refrigerator and a hot-plate stove, but most of our clothes and beds were soaked inside the damaged houses,” Ranenyi said. She had been staying with neighbours since the flood and she got food from her grandmother. At the time of our going to press, they still had not received assistance. Mulalo Khakhu, who is from the same village as Ranenyi, also lost many of his possessions. Khakhu, his girlfriend and two children have since been staying with neighbours. “I only managed to carry out a few blankets. Most of my belongings were destroyed by the rains,” said Khakhu. On Sunday, Limpopo Mirror visited a few of the families in Vleifontein, Extension 1. Some said they were struggling to get out of their homes to buy food from the nearest shops. Residents complained about the lack of maintenance as far as the stormwater drainage systems are concerned. They accuse the municipality of not cleaning these regularly, which causes the area to flood during heavy rains. Motorists who use the main tarred road from Vleifontein to Elim had to drive very cautiously, as some parts of the road were badly damaged by the rains. Trees were uprooted in some hilly places along the road.  Mulalo Khakhu of Vuvha Seville village is walking on top of his collapsed house.  Bernard Chiguvare is a Zimbabwean-born journalist. He writes mainly for the online publication, Groundup.  Email: bernchiguvare@gmail.com