News - Date: 29 January 2021 Written by: Kaizer Nengovhela / Viewed: 600 Although no deaths or injuries were reported, tropical storm Eloise created havoc in sections of Vhembe the past weekend. Several houses and bridges were damaged and many roads in the rural areas are closed. Residents who live in slippery mountain areas around Vhembe have parked their vehicles near the main tarred roads, because they are unable to reach their homes by car. The bridge between Vuvha, Tshedza and Tshakhuma Tshitavhadulu washed away, and two families who were supposed to bury their loved ones had to carry the coffins of the deceased for nearly five kilometres to the graveyard because the hearse could not cross the collapsed bridge. Many people at Tshakhuma were trapped, and their houses flooded. Ms Gundo Mutavhatsindi, who stays with her family of seven in a six-room house, said that her house, furniture, groceries and clothes were damaged by the heavy floods. She is appealing to the government to assist them with accommodation. A resident of Tshitavhadulu in Tshakhuma said that they now had to make their way past the collapsed bridge to get to Thohoyandou and Louis Trichardt to buy necessities. Spokesperson for the Vhembe District Municipality Matodzi Ralushai said that affected communities were now forced to use alternative roads to get to work and run daily errands. “Most of the bridges have structural problems, while others are under water,” he said. “The municipality has sent a disaster team out to visit different areas that had been affected by the floods. We are pleading with parents to warn their children not to swim in the dams or play near the rivers, because there are a lot of crocodiles,” Ralushai said. He told Limpopo Mirror that many of the bridges around some parts of Vhembe had been totally washed away by the heavy rain. Some of the families have been left homeless after their mud huts collapsed, but Ralushai said that he had not received reports yet that any of these people had been injured. He warned residents living close to rivers and streams that they must evacuate to a safer or higher place when the water level rises. “When you cross a flowing river where water reaches above your ankles, turn back and use alternative routes. Never try to walk, swim, or drive in swift-flowing water, as it can sweep you off your feet. Do not drive over a low-water bridge if the water is flowing strongly across it. Educate your children not to swim in rivers, streams, and ponds in open areas. Do not drive during a severe storm and park away from electrical lines, trees, streams, and rivers,” he said. Spokesperson for the Department of Social Development Witness Tiva said that storm victims would be provided with essentials. “The department is ready to provide relief that includes food parcels, blankets, and other basic amenities to displaced families,” he said.  Family members of two families from Vuvha carry the coffins across the stream after the heavy rains washed away the bridge. Photo supplied.  Kaizer Nengovhela started writing stories for Limpopo Mirror more than a decade ago, in 2 000. Prior to that he had a five year stint at Phala-Phala FM as sports presenter. In 2005 Kaizer received an award from the province's premier as Best Sports Presenter. The same year he was also nominated as Best Sports Reporter by the Makhado Municipality. Kaizer was awarded the Mathatha Tsedu award in 2014.  Email: kaizerdo@webmail.co.za