News - Date: 29 January 2021 Written by: Silas Nduvheni / Viewed: 623 Family members, church colleagues and friends described the late pastor Dr Muvhango Mackson Maanzwane from the Apostolic Faith Mission’s Shayandima Community Outreach Assembly as a pioneer who “died with his boots on” for serving God and giving to the needy. Pastor Maanzwane (71) died on 20 January, shortly after he was diagnosed with Covid-19. Freddy Maanzwane said that his older brother was the last one of their clan left to whom anyone could turn in times of trouble, and that they could say with certainty that one of their biggest trees had fallen. He said that he would be happy to see the Maanzwane family stand united, even though their tree was no longer with them. The funeral was attended by well-known pastors such as Bishop SJ Tshikomba from the Apostolic Faith Mission in Lwamondo-Tshifulanani, Apostle VW Madzinge from the Christian Worship Centre in Maniini and Past Tshamano Phuluwa. All testified that Maanzwane had been their friend and father, who had now been called home by their Heavenly Father. Naphtal Ramawa, a church member, read the obituary. Pastor Maanzwane was born in Ha-Masia Tshiphuseni in the Vuwani area. He started his career as a district labour officer in the Vuwani Magistrate’s Office from 1974 to 1979, working as an interpreter and clerk in the criminal court, as well as a marriage officer. “In 1979, he left government work and started working full-time in the ministry as Presiding Pastor of the Apostolic Faith Mission’s Community Outreach Assembly in Shayandima. During his tenure as pastor, under his leadership, he started church assemblies, such as the Shayandima one currently operating as Community Outreach Assembly, Tswinga Mulenzhe, and Tshisaulu,” Ramawa said. He was also the one responsible for organising overseas trips such as the ones to Israel, Japan, Korea, and the UK, among others, and he attended international conferences and seminars. A message from Thovhele Nthumeni Masia reads: “As the clan of Govha Masenga, we are saddened by the passing of Pastor Maanzwane. He was a man who worked hard to represent the people and the clan.” Past Maanzwane is survived by his wife, Evelyn Maanzwane. He was buried on Saturday, 23 January, at Ha-Masia Tshipuseni in the Vuwani area.  The late gospel pioneer, Pastor Mackson Maanzwane. He died on 20 January, shortly after being diagnosed with Covid-19. Photo: supplied.  Email: