News - Date: 15 January 2021 Written by: Tshifhiwa Mukwevho / Viewed: 258 A 19-year-old diesel mechanic student from Musina TVET College was recently crowned as the first Miss Musina FM. Matevhutevhu Judy Muravha, who is also a talented poet from Matshena village, said that she was excited about winning the pageant. “I take modelling as a potential career, so that I get to prove to people that it is not impossible to have beauty and brains,” she said. “Modelling sparks my self-esteem. Through modelling I have discovered my true personality, strengths, and weaknesses as a person. Today, I promote self-discovery, healthy friendships and self-discipline.” Judy, who joined the modelling industry in December 2018 when she was in Grade 12, had previously won some modelling titles such as Miss Tshilamba 2018/19 (2nd runner-up), Miss Exclusive 2019/20 (queen), Miss Venda Niani 2019/20 (queen), Miss Model At Home 2020/21 (queen) and Face of Limpopo Youth Empowerment, Miss Charity 2020/21 (winner). “I see myself as someone who has achieved a lot thus far, but I look forward to achieving more,” Judy said. Boitumelo Arochelle Chirwa was announced 2nd Princess, while Talifhani Milicent Munzhelele won the 3rd Princess prize. Musina FM’s programmes manager, Lufuno Ndouvhada, congratulated Judy on winning the title and said that they were proud of Judy’s achievement. “We are really proud of what Judy Muravha has achieved and we are confident that she will represent Miss Musina FM with dedication and excellence,” Ndouvhada said. He extended special gratitude to all the other models who gave their time and participated in the Miss Musina FM 2020/21 contest. “We're aware of some little confusion that occurred during the show,” Ndouvhada said. “It will be good if you give us your point of view because nwana ha bebiwi na u tshimbila, hoping that the second instalment of the pageant will be more fun and well organised.”  Miss Musina FM 2020/2021, Matevhutevhu Judy Muravha, is flanked by Talifhani Milicent Munzhelele (left) and Boitumelo Arochelle Chirwa (right). Picture supplied.  Tshifhiwa Given Mukwevho was born in 1984 in Madombidzha village, not far from Louis Trichardt in the Limpopo Province. After submitting articles for roughly a year for Limpopo Mirror's youth supplement, Makoya, he started writing for the main newspaper. He is a prolific writer who published his first book, titled A Traumatic Revenge in 2011. It focusses on life on the street and how to survive amidst poverty. His second book titled The Violent Gestures of Life was published in 2014.  Email: givenmukwevho@yahoo.com