News - Date: 25 February 2021 Written by: Kaizer Nengovhela / Viewed: 360 The Limpopo MEC for Education, Ms Polly Boshielo complimented the class of 2020 during the announcement of this year’s matric results in Polokwane on Monday (23rd). The class of 2020 achieved a provincial pass rate of 68.2%, and although this is a decline of 5% from 2019, Boshielo said that she was proud of the learners for their hard work, despite challenges like access to online learning resources. The province’s top achievers were honoured during Monday’s function. Among them was Pearl Khosa from the PP Hlungwani Secondary in Green Farm village in the Malamulele region, who bagged seven distinctions and a 100% pass in Mathematics. Pearl has her heart set on becoming an actuary. “I still can’t believe it’s happening. I mean, I didn’t expect it, but I expected it. I worked hard and the support that I received from my teachers, the principal, the school, my parents, my whole extended family, helped a lot. This year, I am looking to study Actuarial Science at UCT. I hope to excel. I’m going to put in the same amount of time, maybe add a little, in my studies and just focus so that I can get my degree and start working,” she said. She advised other pupils to find successful people as role models. “Having role models in life usually helps a person to be able to draw a picture of where he or she wants to be in future.” Boshielo said that more funds will be required for extra lessons to reduce the impact of Covid-19 at most schools. “As a department, we will be investing our energy, time and resources on closing the gaps that Covid-19 exposed in terms of our traditional ways of teaching and learning,” she said. “Extra classes will require more funding given the Covid-19 pandemic that have stolen the teaching and learning time.” Premier Stan Mathabatha has called for action against officials responsible for schools that performed poorly. These officials were asked to explain why they have been lingering in the same spot for the past five years. “So, I think this is now time for us to start with the so-called consequence management,” Mathabatha said. Pearl Khoza from the PP Hlungwani Secondary School in Green Farm village in Malamulele bagged seven distinctions and a 100% pass rate in Mathematics. Photo supplied.  Kaizer Nengovhela started writing stories for Limpopo Mirror more than a decade ago, in 2 000. Prior to that he had a five year stint at Phala-Phala FM as sports presenter. In 2005 Kaizer received an award from the province's premier as Best Sports Presenter. The same year he was also nominated as Best Sports Reporter by the Makhado Municipality. Kaizer was awarded the Mathatha Tsedu award in 2014.  Email: kaizerdo@webmail.co.za